A Comparative Study on Power Consumption in
Smartphone technology through communication
standards
Rahul V. Nale, M.Tech student, Veltech University, Chennai
Dr.Shiyamala. S, Associate Professor, Veltech University, Chennai
rahulnale4@gmail.com
drshiyamala@veltechuniv.edu.in
ABSTRACT- In twenty first centuries demand for smart phones and mobile primarily based applications
is enlarged suddenly from past few years .now a day’s smart phones acquire the place of standard computers and
laptops up to some limit. Due to smaller, lighter and simple to relinquishment. However, we've some limit of power
in Smartphone technology. The new generation of communication commonplace system like third
generation(3G),4th generation(4G),5th generation(5G), will provide higher service and performance to Smartphone
users, this generation consumes additional power in smart phones .the term of battery backup is refer as electric
battery life. This survey paper presents varied concepts and proposals for reducing the facility consumption in
Smartphone technology which provides additional support to the new generation of communications.

Keywords: Smartphone Technology, Communication Standard, Ultra FDD architecture, power consumption,
wireless technology evolution.
I. INTRODUCTION
Smartphone needed some energy for his or her performing from storage devices. Except for some energy storage
devices like smart phones battery restricted due to size and weight of the device. This means that
energy potency and performance of those devices is extremely crucial to their usability. Hence, best management of
power consumption of those devices is crucial. Most of the electronic widget is power-driven by storage batteries.
For the designer and engineer square measure to provide the most effective device within the market with improved
battery backup, performance, and life. A Smartphone may be a excellent example of the electronic devices and
is charming several engineers and researchers during this field. The communication standards like 3G, 4G, and
5G need giant power for his or her process. They’re facing battery backup issues in Smartphone. High rate services
like
audio/video
streaming
/gaming
conference,
video
on
demand, quicker web and
plenty
of alternative things beside the
fundamental audio decision service.
The mobile makers square
measure competitor with one
another to
provide
Smartphone
with
improved
battery
life and performance. It’s imperative to optimize and management energy usage with efficiency in network parts.
The hardware parts of a typical Smartphone square measure processor/CPU, RAM (Random Access Memory),
LCD, screen, electronic equipment (2G/3G/4G/5G all of it), GPS, Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, Hot-spot, NFC
etc.The economical energy management needs a decent understanding of wherever and the way the energy is
optimized.
The
paper gift a
close analysis
of the
facility
consumption
of Smartphone,
the
Openmoko modern Freerunner . in Paper, measurements overall system power, yet as activity of power consumption
in main hardware parts of device .new generation communication technologies, provides high-speed rate
services. this can be thanks to the upper information measure allotted to those technologies. Thence power drain area

Additional comparer 2G. To amend battery life and performance, it's necessary to effectively optimize power
consumption in each attainable use case situation. With such optimization technique, one additionally ought
to things is that the performance of the general system isn't affected, means that the output and quality of service
(QoS) mustn't be affected. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2. The related work in power
optimization techniques in smartphones. Section 3. Discusses the methodology along with the previous background
study. Section 4. Discusses about power consumption analysis in smartphones technology and Section 5. The
wireless technology evolution 1G.2G, 3G and 4G. Section 6. Conclusion
II. RELATED WORK
Experiment performs a power consumption analysis of on a laptop system. Approach to component power
measurement is driven partially by direct power measurement, but largely by deduction using modeling and off-line
piece-wise analysis. It show that the display and CPU are the main consumers of energy for their class of system,
and that other components contribute substantially only when they are used intensively. Their results same like our
observations that RAM power is insignificant in workloads .The analysis of power consumption in a smartphone
various usage scenarios is described by‘ Openmoko Neo Freerunner ’ for 2G (GSM) connections by developing a
power models [1]. In [2] the paper experiment identifies many components during various states of the smart phone
where the power consumption will be more and critical. An comparison and analysis of power consumption
measurements in smart phones for 2G, 3G networks is presented for the services-text messaging, voice and
data.[3]The authors give the details information about evolution of wireless technology from 1G to 5G and it shows
some specifications which is very helpful for our survey.[4] power consumption in Mobile devices they performed
two experiments, first measures consumption for a set of usage scenarios, which represent common daily user
activities, while second one analyzes a context-aware application with source code.[5] The battery powering a
smartphone also has a size constraint and hence the capacity. Though communication standards systems such as 3rd
Generation (3G), 4th Generation (4G) and 5th Generation (5G) can provide the high speed services to users, they
draw considerably lagrge power in smartphones. This limits the battery backup of smart phones and hence the
battery life. This survey presents various ideas and proposals published for reducing the power consumption in
smartphones which support new generation communication standards. [6] Thesis is presented on Radio Resource
management in 3G UMTS Networks which is used in 3G Smartphone technology. In [7] authors propose an
evolution of these algorithms in the forward link. In [9] context –aware battery management foe mobile phones
presents the information about computing and communication generations. In [10] paper presents on evolution of all
communication generations which gives technical specifications which is very helpful for any further study.
UMTS (Universal Mobile Communication Systems) is a 3rd generation (3G) telecommunication network based on
the existing GSM (2nd generation, 2G) core network employing new radio access technology WCDMA (Wideband
Code Division Multiple Access). LTE (Long Term Evolution )is a 4G speed is (200Mbps to 1Gbps) it gives high
end live video streaming but 3G was developed mainly to provide high speed data rate (up to 2 Mbps) services like
internet, video telephony, multimedia and audio/video streaming which 2G could not support due to bandwidth
limitations. But 4G technologies give high end live video streaming. From 4G we fill the live streaming video calls.

III.METHODOLOGY

Figure 1. UTRA FDD Radio Interface protocol architecture.

The UMTS -Universal Mobile Telecommunication System is a third generation mobile communication system,
designed to support a wide range of applications with good quality of service (QoS). The 3G has efficiency of
transporting wideband and high bit rate multimedia services with some traditional cellular services e.g. voice,
messaging etc. To provide these services with better service quality and enhance the performance of wireless
network, management of radio resources is necessary. To do this, UMTS tender many radio resource management
(RRM) techniques. These RRM providing different services with better quality with keeping the end user happy and
stable network. In paper, main objective is to explore some RRM techniques and understand their practical
importance with simulation of RRM algorithms. Starting with UMTS overview and some important concept about
UMTS architecture. Then going deep into physical layer of UMTS. In the wake of getting solid idea of UMTS radio
design and methodology, chipped away at various RRM procedures and at last, investigate two power control
calculations to comprehend and get some pragmatic experience of genuine RRM systems, in light of the fact that
power control is the vital most and basic piece of RRM methods due to interference limited nature of CDMA
systems. WCDMA is a wideband Direct-Sequence Code Division Multiple Access (DS-CDMA) system. Portable
User data bits are spread over a wide transfer speed by duplicating the client information with semi arbitrary bits
(called chips). The chip rate of 3. 84 Mcps (Million chips for every second) prompts a bearer transfer speed of
around 5 MHz It bolsters very factor client information rates, as such the idea of getting Bandwidth capacity on
Demand (BoD) is all around bolstered. It underpins two fundamental methods of operation-Frequency Division
Duplex (FDD) and Time Division Duplex (TDD). In the FDD mode, isolate 5 MHz transporter frequencies are
utilized for the uplink and downlink separately, while in TDD just a single 5 MHz is timeshared between the uplink
and downlink. Uplink is the association from the versatile to the base station, and downlink is that from the base
station to the portable. The radio interface traditions are required to set up, reconfigure and release the Radio Bearer
organizations. The convention engineering [9] is appeared in Figure 1. The convention layers over the physical layer
are known as the information interface layer (Layer2) and the system (Layer 3). In the UTRA FDD radio interface,
Layer 2 is part into sub layers. In the control plane, Layer 2 contains two sub-layers – Medium Access Control

(MAC) convention and Radio Link Control (RLC) convention. In the client plane, notwithstanding MAC and RLC,
two extra administration subordinate conventions exist – Packet Data Convergence Protocol (PDCP) and
Broadcast/Multicast Control Protocol (BMC). Layer 3 comprises of one convention, called Radio Resource Control
(RRC) that incorporates a place with the management plane. There are 2 interfacing areas within the UMTS
network, one is that the infrastructure domain that consists of the core network (CN) and second is that the UTRA
(UTRAN) network, additionally user equipment (UE) domain. The UTRAN that consists of mobile station, the
bottom station (Antenna, transceiver and controller) and radio interface is there between mobile station & base
station. In UMTS network, the core network that's referred to as CN has the most responsibility to
supply change and routing for user traffic.
IV. POWER CONSUMPTION ANALYSIS

Figure 2 . Power breakdown for sending an SMS

Power consumed for causing associate degree SMS is dominated by the show elements and is as shown in Figure. 2.
The GSM radio shows a mean power of sixty seven.3 ± 20.9 mW, only 7.9 mW bigger than idle over the total length
of the benchmark, and accounting for twenty-two you look after the mixture power (excluding backlight). All
alternative elements showed associate degree RSD of below 3 %.

Fig 3.GSM phone call average power

Figure 3. Shows the ability consumption once creating a GSM telephone call of 57-second period [1]. GSM power
clearly dominates during this case at a median power of 832.4 ± 99.0 mW. the ability breakdown for emailing
between the GPRS and Wi-Fi benchmarks is comparable, apart from the GSM and Wi-Fi radios. Despite presenting
identical workloads to the radios, GSM consumes over 3 times the ability of Wi-Fi. For net browsing application,
GPRS consumes a lot of power than Wi-Fi by an elementof two.5. just in case of a next-generation technology 3G,
this issue might increase even a lot of thanks to the upper bandwidths supported by 3G. The results of this study

show that the bulk of power consumption are often attributed to the GSM module and also the show, as well
as the alphanumeric display panel and touchscreen, the graphics accelerator/driver, and also the backlight.

Figure 4 . Power consumption for different services

In
Figure 4.
Power
consumption for
various mobile
services
normalized
facility
to the consumption throughout downloading information victimisation High-Speed Downlink Packet Access
(HSDPA)
is
shown
[2].
Downloading information victimisationWireless native space Network
(WLAN) relatively drains
lesser
power.
For causing associate SMS
and creating a
voice decision, the
facility consumption is sort of comparable however considerably but that of HSDPA and wireless local area
network. It is clear from the plot that each one the capabilities that imply the employment of a wireless air
interface area unit power- hungry, there for considerably reducing the battery lifetime of the phone. The paper
reports larger energy consumption in 4G networks for text electronic communication and voice services than energy
consumption in 3G networks. On the opposite aspect, the 4G networks become additional energy
friendly once giant volumes of information got to be downloaded additionally 4G provides the fastest speed as
compare to others that ne'er seen before.
Table – 1 Power consumption for voice service

scenario
Receiving a voice call

GSM
612.7mW

UMTS
1224.3mW

LTE,WIMAX
1838.1mW

Making a voice call
683.6mW

1265.7mW

2060.3mW

15.1mW

25.3mW

32.7mW

Idle mode

Table .1 shows the values for power consumption on Mobile for GSM, UMTS, and LTE mistreatment the voice
service. The ability values for the calls are obtained by creating and receiving a call of 5 minutes and conniving the
common of the ability levels. The observation results show that creating a decision mistreatment GSM-47%, UMTS56%, and LTE-72%. For receiving a decision GSM-48%, UMTS-59%, LTE-74% and that i ideal mode GSM-15%,
UMTS-25%, LTE-33%.LTE takes perpetually additional power as compared to others.

Service

2G

3G

4G

50 SMS of 100 bytes

90J

110J

150J

100 Mbytes downloading

10002.6J

3512.1J

2131.2J

5 Hours voice calls

12304.8J

22782.6J

28638.6J

Total

22404.0J

26404.7J

30919.8J

Table - 2 Energy comparisons using 2G, 3G, 4G

Table .2 shows a comparison of energy consumption mistreatment a pair ofG alone, 3G alone and
intelligent shift [2] between these networks. it's clear from the observation that, 4G consumes additional power than
3G for the text of the appliance electronic messaging, downloading knowledge and voice decision. Parallel
connections save energy however the gains vary betting on the technology. transmission control
protocol downloads throughout 3G voice calls result into 75%-90% energy savings, transmission control
protocol downloads throughout VoIP calls result into 30%-40% savings and transmission protocol
control downloads once different transmission control protocol streams square measure active at identical interface
result into 0%- 20% savings. The results indicate that there's a big potential to avoid wasting energy if
applications square measure designed to require advantage of this development.
V.WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY EVOLUTION
The first generation (1G) mobile wireless communication network was analog used for voice calls solely. The
second generation (2G) could be a digital technology and supports text electronic communication. When this was
3G that provided transmission support in
conjunction
with higher knowledge transmission
rates
and enlarged capability. The fourth generation (4G) integrates3G with fastened net to support wireless
mobile net, that is an evolution to
beat the
constraints of
3G
and conjointly raises
the
QoS, will
increase the information measure and reduces the price of resources.

Figure 5 . Wireless Technology Evolution

Figure 5. shows the entire wireless technology evolution from the year of 2000 to 2016, however wireless
technology bit by bit rising the techniques furthermore as speed (172 kbps to 1gbps) still improvement goes on and
axis shows the scores of subscribers exploitation this technology .we used 2G for long length as compare to others at
the moment 3G, 4G and these days we tend to area unit exploitation 4G LTE advance which supplies speed up to
1Gbps.

Figure 6. Evolution digital cellular standards architecture

Figure 6. Shows the evolution of digital cellular standards design in 2G we have a tendency to used GSM, in 2.5 G
used GPRS and EDGE, in 3G used UMTS and in 4G we have a tendency to victimization LTE(wi-max)
once following version of 4G is LTE advanced which supplies the most effective performance ever.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
This comparative survey given the Associate in analysis of power consumption and wireless technology evolution in
smart phones technology in numerous use case state of affairs like causation an SMS, creating a voice decision,
receiving a decision downloading information and plenty of alternative things. the end result of this analysis is
that the facility consumption are a lot of and demanding in phone’s electronic equipment and thus are often thoughtabout as an honest candidate for optimizing power consumption. The surveys say that within the feature we should
always be a lot of specialize in power savings techniques.
REFERENCES
[1] Aaron carroll and Gernot heiser, “ An Analysis of Power Consumption in a smartphone”, USENIXATC’10 Proceedings of the USENIX
conference on USENIX annual technical conference,2010.
[2] Kravets , R. and Krishnan, P. Power management techniques for mobile communication. In Proceedings of The Fourth Annual ACM/IEEE
International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking (MOBICOM ’98), pages 157-168,Dallas, TX, October 1998
[3] Dr. Prinima, Dr. Jyoti Pruthi , “Evolution of Mobile Communication Network: from 1G to 5G” International Journal of Innovative Research
in Computer and Communication Engineering, Vol. 4, Special Issue 4, August 2016.
[4] Luca Ardito, Giuseppe Procaccianti, Marco Torchiano, Giuseppe Migliore ,“ Profiling Power Consumption on Mobile Devices .The Third
International Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies ENERGY 2013.
[5] Abhiman. K, Dr. S. Gayathri, “Optimizing Power Consumption in Smartphones: A Comprehensive Survey “International Journal of Latest
Trends in Engineering and Technology (IJLTET) Vol 7 issue 2 July 2016.
[6] Muhammad Abdur Rahman Haider, Abu Bakar Bhatti, Ammar Ahmad Kirmani ,“ Radio Resource Management In 3G UMTS Networks,
This thesis is presented Blekinge Institute of Technology
November 2007.
[7] Jad Nasreddine, Louffi Nuagmi and Xavier Lagrange, “Downlink Adaptive Power Control Algorithm for 3g Cellular Cdma Networks”,
15th IEEE International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications, Vol. 3, pp.2192-2196,2004.
[8] Harri Holma and Antti Toskala, “WCDMA FOR UMTS: Radio Access for Third Generation Mobile Communications”, Third Edition.
[9] N. Ravi, J. Scott, L. Han, and L. Iftode, “Context-aware battery management for mobile phones,” in Proceedings of the 2008 Sixth Annual
IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communications, ser. PERCOM ’08. Washington, DC, USA: IEEE Computer
Society, 2008.

[10] Jyotsna Agrawal1, Rakesh Patel2, Dr. P.Mor3, Dr. P.Dubey4 and Dr. J.M.keller ,“ Evolution of Mobile Communication Network: from 1G
to 4G Int. J. of Multidisciplinary and Current Research, Vol.3 (Nov/Dec 2015).

